ok so let's start with a challenge so
the challenges is for you to create a
new python file and write a short
program that asks the user to type 2
integer numbers then prints out the
first number / the second now the
program shouldn't crash no matter what
the user types in although you shouldn't
have to worry about control keys and
just as a hint here if you have to do
the same thing more than once that
sounds like a good use for a function so
that's you challenge see how you go
pause the video and I'll see you when
you get back ok so let's go through my
solution to this challenge and as
always yours might be different
the important thing here is that you've
got a solution that works
not that you've got identical code to me
so create a new file for this
i'm going to right click over here click
on new select python file will call this
one...okay we're
gonna be asking for a number more than
once so i put the code to get the number
from the user into a function so...
...
so the function will keep asking for a
number until something valid is entered
to put everything into an infinite loop
using while true on line 2 so that loop
just keeps looping so we'll have to use
break or return statement to get out of
it obviously using the return statement
on line five next comes the try except
blocks so we've seen how to get numbers
from the keyboard a few times we now
use the input function then convert the
users text into an int now that's
the first place where an exception can
be thrown when python attempts to
convert the user's input into an int value
now obviously the conversion
to an int will only work if the users
has actually entered numbers and
nothing else
so we need to wrap the conversion in a
try block so we can trap that invalid
input so how did I know what exception
that we should be handling well one
approach to this would be to read
through the list of exceptions in the
documentation link that i showed you in
the previous video that's certainly one
way to find out
now I'm a great believer in using
documentation and I've been providing
links to the documentation throughout
this course you really can't just write
code without reading documentation has
lots of it but with that said I'm also
the first to admit that program
documentation isn't the most shall we
say riveting of reads so there's
another way to find out what we need to
know i'll jump that as well so i'm going
to comment all that out for now and run
this little program so let's just
comment out the code the code we want to
run temporarily.....
....
alright so let's run this and we're
going to enter a number obviously with a valid
number we get no problems but we try
to run it with some garbage input you
see that the exception that we've raised
here by putting in something invalid is
a value error invalid literal for int with
base 10 switching back to the
documentation if we look for our value
exception
sorry value error now obviously search for it
but its a fair way down the list so
chances are you might have to do a favor
of reading to find it so either way you
could actually read this or you could
have also gone back to the code and did
what I did was try and get the program
to crash without using try and except to
see what errors what exceptions are
actually generated in this case the
value error either way we'll find out
what we need but when dealing with
exceptions
I find personally it's often easier to
just cause the problem and see what
exceptions raised and then to add the try
except Clause after that
alright let's delete that line that i
added temporarily and go ahead and
uncomment our function and just
carry on explaining more about what it
does
so if a valid number is entered on line
4 the code is going to continue and
the number will just be returned but if
invalid input has entered a value error
exception will be raised as we've just
seen so we handle that error in our except
Clause now we don't do a great deal is
not really much we can do apart from
asking the user to type another number
then we could perhaps make the message a
bit more helpful or mention that only
digits are allowed
so you've got an extra point their gold
star if you manage to do that in your
message now once that message in the
exception blocks printed the code
continues so we'll go around the loop
the while loop again and that will keep
happening until a valid number is entered
so we can be really confident this that
this function will always return a valid
int value
alright so how do we make use of this
function well let's add get the two
numbers from the users i'm going to put
..
...
...let's finish this
off by performing the division now
we've seen in the previous video that
division by zero can raise a 0 division
error exception i'm going to put the
code to perform the division in a try
block and catch the exception i'm gonna
come down here and then try...
...
ok now using the same prompt twice isn't
really very user-friendly a user might
wonder what they've done wrong to get
exactly the same prompt again so let's
say actually easily fixed by passing the
text we want to prompt the user want to
prompt the user with as an argument to our
get int function so let's change this a
little bit i'm going to come up here and
make this prompt and then what we're going to
do number equals...instead of
putting a hard-coded string there
we're going to put prompt the prompt is
going to be the message that we want
displayed when we're getting a number
input and in terms of using the get int
method now are the function now
we're going to put...
...
so let's try running this so
please enter the first number we put some
rubbish numbers in there
invalid number entered please try again
and you can see I'm typing it again it's
going to continue asking for that first
number until we put something valid in
there so let's put a valid number like 455
in there now it's asking for the second
number same deal there with invalid input
is going to keep asking until I put
something valid in there
let's put 0 in as the value for the
second number and we get the error can't
divide by 0 so this point I think we've
got a fairly robust program that the
user can't crash by entering invalid
input so if your program behaves in the
same way congratulations
now there are a number of ways that this
could be written and you can even do
away with the second try except block
and use an if statement to check his
second number 0 instead that's also
fine and in this program is very little
to choose between the two
methods now there's still one way the
user can crash the program and that's to
do a control D which may be
control z on earlier versions of
Windows now on operating systems derived
from unix that includes mac OS x and
linux ctrl-d triggers an end-of-file
eof and Windows 10 behave in the same
way i'm going to show you what i mean by
that by running it again and down here
if I do control d the first number now
when I press ctrl-d on a Mac actually
get a different output
that's because the controlled d is map
to another process so what i'm going to do is
cancel out of that and run this again so
on a linux machine or Windows machine
you can try ctrl D from a mac what I have
to do a command D simulate something
similar so i'm going to do that now when
i do that you can see I get this EOF
error the end of file when reading a
line so that's another exception that's
been raised
however if you're doing this on a window
machine or linux machine you might find
that the program starts going a little
bit nuts and that you have to start
looking at manually stopping it
because at this stage the mac has
actually gracefully shut down the
program but you might find that it's
looping continually windows and linux
that's the case come over here and click
on stop process to stop it then cancel
the program if you happen to be running
this from the command line like a
terminal session or from Windows 10 come
from a windows command prompt and
control C should probably stop as well
the bottom line here is that control
d signals to python that there's no
input left so consequently pythons
close the input stream so our code then
catches the exception and in the case of
windows at least and linux loops
back around but the input streams
already been closed so the input
function returns immediately with
another end of file error our code
catches the end of file error and loops back around
and so on and so forth so we definitely
don't want to do that even if the mac
has only come up with one error
it's still not something not a
situation we want to get into so if your
user terminates input in this way
respect their choice and allow the
program to terminate there's nothing you
can really do about it anyway if you're
using python input function to read
from the user right so let's actually
have a look at what we can do is close
down and what we can do in the case of
an end of file error lets actually trap
that and down here what we will do is up
here would be the place to do it after
the accepted value error will get
another one except this time must be eof
error we can do assist.....
we've got an error there and the error is
that we need to basically it's
unresolved reference so we need to
import sys so lets go ahead and do that so
...
...and sys . exit
terminates the program with the exit
code that's used or past as its
argument now for normal program
termination is quite usual to return 0
and if you decide that the user boarding
the program isn't normal termination
then you can return a different value
i'll do that next let's just try running
this first to make sure that works
I've been here and going to do on
a mac command d you would do a ctrl
D on windows or linux and we now just
got the program terminating without
anything else happening now if you are
writing a python script to be used
from the terminal possibly called from a shell
script or Windows command file that it
may be really useful to use different
error codes or exit codes so we can
return a exit code of one if the user
terminate the program and perhaps 2 if they attempt
a division by 0
let's go ahead and add that code so
going to come up here to line 12 going
to change that to assists
sys.extone let's also put an
error in here for the division
by zero close the program now...
....you can see here process finished
with exit code zero so let's try
running this again so now if we do my
command d on a Mac or control d on windows
or linux we get process finished with
exit code one running it again this time
we'll put some valid numbers in 10 the
second number put zero to ensure the 0 division
error comes up can't divide by 0 this
time we got process finished with exit code 2
...
that's really good demonstration of
reacting in a different way when
handling different types of operations
alright let's finish the video here and
we're still got a couple more things we
need to look at with exceptions
let's start on that in the next video